>> WHAT DO WE WANT?
EQUALITY!
WHEN DO
>>fill I: GAY RIGHTS ADVOCATES
SCORED TWO VICTORIES AT THE
SUPREME COURT TODAY, AS JUSTICES
RULED SAME SEX COUPLES ARE
ENTITLED TO FEDERAL BENEFITS AND
CLEARED THE WAY FOR GAY
MARRIAGES TO RESUME IN
CALIFORNIA.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT, WE
EXAMINE THE ACTION ON THIS LAST
DAY OF THE TERM WITH ANALYSIS
FROM MARCIA COYLE, PLUS REACTION
TO THE MUCH-AWAITED DECISIONS.
>> Ifill: THEN, RAY SUAREZ
REPORTS ON A RESILIENT FUNGUS
BEING SPREAD BY THE HOT, DRY,
DUSTY WIS OFND THE MOJAVE DESERT
AND CAUSING SERIOUS INFECTIONS.
>> I THOUGHT I WAS DYING.
THAT FIRST WEEKEND, I THOUGHT, I
MEAN, I THOUGHT FOR SURE.
I'VE NEVER BEEN THIS SI IN CKMY
LIFE.
>> Brown: WE RECAP A DRAMATIC
NIGHT IN THE TEXAS STATE SENATE,
WHERE A MARATHON FILIBUSTER AND
CHANTING ACTIVISTS FOILED A
LAST-MINUTE PUSH TO PASS NEW
RESTRICTIONS ON ABORTIONS.
>> Ifill: AND MARGARET WARNER
UPDATES THE MOUNTING TENSIONS IN
EGYPT, AS PRESIDENT MOHAMMED
MORSI ADDRESSES HIS NATION AND
THE OPPOSITION PLANS LARGE SCALE
PROTESTS.
>> Ifill: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
>> Brown: SUPPORTERS OF SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE CLAIMED A TWIN WIN
TODAY, COMING ON THE FINAL DAY
OF THE U.S. SUPREME COURT'S
BOTH OF THE CLOSELY-WATCHED
CASES WERE DECIDED, FIVE-TO-
FOUR.
RAY SUAREZ BEGINS OUR COVERAGE.
>> Reporter: OUTSIDE THE COURT
BUILDING, SUPPORTERS OF GAY
MARRIAGE ERUPTED AT THE FIRST
DECISION.
>> DOMA'S DOWN, DOMA'S
UNCONSTITUTIONAL!
>> Reporter: THE JUSTICES HAD
STRUCK DOWN A KEY SECTION OF THE
"DEFENSE OF MARRIAGE ACT" OR
DOMA.
THAT SECTION OF THE 1996 LAW,
SIGNED BY PRESIDENT CLINTON,
DEFINES MARRIAGE AS "ONE MAN AND
ONE WOMAN", AND IT BARS SAME-SEX
COUPLES FROM COLLECTING FEDERAL
MARRIAGE-RELATED BENEFITS.
BUT THE MAJORITY, LED BY JUSTICE
ANTHONY KENNEDY, FOUND THOSE
PROVISIONS ARE UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
KENNEDY WROTE:
THE COURT LEFT INTACT A SEPARATE
PROVISION THAT LETS A STATE
REFUSE TO RECOGNIZE A SAME-SEX
UNION FROM ANOTHER STATE.
STILL, FOR GAY RIGHTS
SUPPORTERS, THE OVERALL DECISION
WAS WELCOME NEWS.
>> I'M VERY PROUD TODAY OF OUR
SUPREME COURT'S DECISION.
IT'S VERY, VERY PERSONAL AND I'M
DEEPLY APPRECIATIVE.
>> Reporter: A SMALLER GROUP OF
GAY MARRIAGE OPPONENTS DEPLORED
THE DECISION.
>> WELL I'M DISAPPOINTED IN THE
RULING.
I BELIEVE THAT MARRIAGE IS
BETWEEN ONE MAN AND ONE WOMAN
AND I'M AFRAID THAT THIS RULING
WILL AFFECT THE DEFINITION OF
MARRIAGE SO THAT IF IT'S NOT
BETWEEN ONE MAN AND ONE WOMAN.
IT CAN BE... IT CAN BE ANYONE.
>> Reporter: GAY RIGHTS
PROPONENTS ALSO CELEBRATED
A DECISION ON CALIFORNIA'S
PROPOSITION EIGHT, THE 2008
BALLOT MEASURE THAT BANNED SAME-
SEX MARRIAGE.
A FEDERAL TRIAL JUDGE FOUND IT
UNCONSTITUTIONAL, AND SUPPORTERS
OF PROP EIGHT APPEALED AND LOST
AT THE APPELLATE LEVEL.
BUT TODAY'S SUPREME COURT
MAJORITY CHOSE NOT TO RULE ON
GAY MARRIAGE BANS IN GENERAL.
INSTEAD, THEY FOUND THOSE BEHIND
THE APPEAL HAD NO LEGAL
STANDING.
AS A RESULT, CHIEF JUSTICE JOHN
ROBERTS WROTE THAT:
"WE HAVE NO AUTHORITY TO DECIDE
TH CASISE ON THE MERITS, AND
NEITHER DID THE 9TH CIRCUIT"
COURT OF APPEALS.
THAT MEANS THE TRIAL COURT'S
AFTERWARD, THE PRINCIPALS IN THE
CASE EMERGED, TWO CALIFORNIA
COUPLES WHO CHALLENGED
PROPOSITION EIGHT.
DAVID BOIES IS ONE OF THEIR
LAWYERS.
>> OUR PLAINTIFFS NOW CAN GO
BACK TO CALIFORNIA AND TOGETHER
WITH EVERY OTHER CITIZEN OF
CALIFORNIA MARRY THE PERSON THEY
LOVE.
>> Reporter: BUT ANDREW PUGNO OF
PROTECT MARRIAGE-- THE GROUP
BEHIND PROPOSITION 8-- SAID NOT
SO FAST.
>> TODAY'S RULING HAS COMPLETELY
NULLIFIED THE 9TH CIRCUIT'S
RULING AGAINST PROPOSITION 8.
THAT PRECEDENT HAS NOW BEEN
WIPED AWAY BY THE SUPREME COURT.
AND SO THERE IS CURRENTLY TODAY
NO APPELLATE COURT DECISION
INVALIDATING PROPSITION 8, AND
WE REMAIN COMMITTED TO THE
>> Reporter: REACTION FROM
OFFICIAL WASHINGTON WAS SWIFT
AND MIXED.
AFTER LEAVING FOR AFRICA,
PRESIDENT OBAMA RELEASED A
STATEMENT APPLAUDING THE DOMA
DECISION.
AIDES SAID HE LATER TELEPHONED
THE PLAINTIFF IN THAT CASE--
EDIE WINDSOR-- FROM ABOARD AIR
FORCE ONE.
HE ALSO CALLED TWO OF THE
CALIFORNIA PLAINTIFFS, KRIS
PERRY AND SANDY STIER DURING
THEIR LIVE INTERVIEW ON MSNBC.
>> WE'RE PROUD OF YOU GUYS AND
WE'RE SO PROUD OF CALIFORNIA.
>> Reporter: AT THE U.S.
CAPITOL, A GROUP OF HOUSE
DEMOCRATS, LED BY MINORITY
LEADER NANCY PELOSI ALSO
WELCOMED THE RULINGS.
>> FROM THE START, MANY OF US
HAD BELIEVED SECTION 3 OF THE
DEFENSE OF MARRIAGE ACT IS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL AND IN FACT, WE
BELIEVE THE WHOLE BILL IS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
TODAY THE SUPREME COURT AGREED,
AND JUSTICE WILL BE DONE FOR
LOVING L.G.B.T. COUPLES ACROSS
MY HOME STATE.
>> Reporter: ON THE OTHER SIDE,
HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER HAD
FILED THE CASE ASKING THE
SUPREME COURT TO UPHOLD DOMA.
HE SAID IN A STATEMENT HE WAS
DISAPPOINTED.
OTHER HOUSE REPUBLICANS WENT
FURTHER.
>> WHAT THE SUPREMEOURT C RULED
TODAY WAS ON THE BASIS OF EQUAL
PROTECTION AND YET IN ONE OF THE
GREATEST IRONIES OF THIS
DECISION, THEY DENIED EQUAL
PROTECTION TO EVERY AMERICAN IN
THE UNITED STATES, HOW DID THEY
DO THAT?
BECAUSE THEY UNDERCUT THE
PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVES WHEN
THEY VOTED ON THE DEFENSE OF
MARRIAGE ACT IN THE FIRST PLACE.
>> Reporter: THE EFFECTS OF THE
TWO DECISIONS WILL BE SEEN IN
SHORT ORDER.
THE DOMA RULING OPENS THE DOOR
FOR GAY AND LESBIAN COUPLES TO
SEEK FEDERAL BENEFITS IN THE 12
STATES THAT NOW ALLOW SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE.
AS FOR PROPOSITION 8, TODAY'S
ACTION MEANS A LOWER COURT
RULING THAT STRUCK DOWN THE
CALIFORNIA LAW REMAINS IN
EFFECT, SO SAME-SEX MARRIAGES
THERE COULD RESUME IN ABOUT A
MONTH.
THRONGS GATHERED AT SAN
FRANCISCO'S CITY HALL THIS
MORNING TO HEAR THE NEWS.
"THE NEWSHOUR'S" SPENCER MICHELS
SPOKE WITH MAYOR ED LEE ABOUT
WHAT COMES NEXT.
>> THEY WILL BE GAY MARRIAGES
ALL OVER THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
SO WE DON'T BELIEVE THERE WILL
BE A BIG RUSH TO COME TO SAN
FRANCISCO TO GET MARRIED.
WE ARE WAITING FOR THE LEGAL
INSTRUCTIONS FROM THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL THAT INSTRUCTS ALL THE
COUNTIES IN CALIFORNIA TO ABIDE
BY CERTAIN RULES AND REGULATIONS
AS THEY INVITE GAY MARRIAGES TO
OCCUR.
>> Reporter: CALIFORNIA GOVERNOR
JERRY BROWN DIRECTED STATE
OFFICIALS TO START ISSUING
MARRIAGE LICENSES TO GAY COUPLES
AS SOON AS POSSIBLE, BUT THE 9TH
CIRCUIT COURT OF APPEALS SAID IT
WON'T LIFT ITS CURRENT HOLD ON
SAME-SEX UNIONS FOR AT LEAST 25
DAYS.
>> Ifill: FOR MORE ON TODAY'S
COURT DECISIONS WE ARE JOINED
ONCE AGAIN, BY MARCIA COYLE OF
THE "NATIONAL LAW JOURNAL."
WHAT A WEEK WE'VE HAD HERE,
MARCIA.
>> AMAZING WEEK.
>> Ifill: TODAY WAS
UNDOUBTEDLY GOOD NEWS FOR GAY
MARRIAGE ADVOCATES BUT NOT FOR
THE SAME REASONS.
>> TRUE.
THESE WERE TWO VERY DIFFERENT
CASES.
ONE INVOLVED WITH THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT COULD DO, THE OTHER
INVOLVED HA THE STATES COULD DO
AND THEY RAISED TWO DIFFERENT
QUESTIONS.
FIRST DECISION WE HEARD FROM THE
BENCH TODAY WAS IN THE CHALLENGE
TO SECTION 3 OF THE FEDERAL
DEFENSE OF MARRIAGE ACT AND THAT
SECTION DEFINES MARRIAGE AS A
UNION BETWEEN A MAN AND A WOMAN.
EDITH WINDSOR BROUGHT THE
NEW YORK STATE LAW.
AFTER HER SPOUSE DIED SHE WAS
DENIED AN I.R.S. EXEMPTION FOR A
SPOUSAL ESTATE TAX EXEMPTION.
SHE WAS FACED WITH AN ALMOST
$400,000 ESTATE TAX BILL.
HER SPOUSE LEFT HER, EDITH, HER
ESTATE.
SHE PREVAILED IN THE LOWER
COURTS.
THEY FOUND THAT SECTION 3 OF
DOMA UNCONSTITUTIONAL AND
THE CASE CAME TO THE SUPREME
COURT WITH A PROBLEM, JUST AS
THE OTHER CASE FROM CALIFORNIA
CAME TO THE COURT WITH A
PROBLEM.
IN THE DOMA CASE, BY THE TIME
THE CASE GOT TO THE SUPREME
COURT, THE UNITED STATES HAD
STOPPED DEFENDING DOMA.
SO THE FIRST HURDLE THE COURT
FACED WAS WHETHER IT ACTUALLY
HAD A CASE OR CONTROVERSY BEFORE
IT SINCE THE UNITED STATES
AGREED WE DITH WINDSOR THAT DOMA
WAS UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
JUSTICE KENNEDY TODAY FOUND
THERE STILL WAS A STAKE FOR THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IN THIS CASE.
THE I.R.S.' TAX BILL.
SO HE WAS ABLE TO REACH THE
MERITS OF THE QUESTION THAT
EDITH WINDSOR HAD INITIALLY
RAISED ABOUT DOMA'S
CONSTITUTIONALITY.
>> Ifill: AS RAY SAID,
PROPOSITION 8 WAS MOSTLY ABOUT
THE THAT THEY DIDN'T HAVE THE
STANDING TO EVEN BRING THIS CASE
TO WHERE IT ENDED UP BEING SO
THEY KICKED IT BACK DOWN FOR THE
COURTS IN CALIFORNIA TO DECIDE.
>> RIGHT.
PROPOSITION 8 ASKED WHETHER A
STATE CONSISTENT WITH THE
14th AMENDMENT COULD DEFINE
MARRIAGE AS BETWEEN A MAN AND A
WOMAN.
ITS PROBLEM WAS THAT THE
PROPONENTS OF PROPOSITION 8 HAD
APPEALED THE TRIAL COURT'S
DECISION THAT PROPOSITION 8 WAS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
DID THE PROPONENTS THEN HAVE
WHAT WE CALL STANDING TO BRING
THAT APPEAL IN FEDERAL COURT AND
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS WROTE FOR
A DIVIDED COURT TODAY THAT THEY
DID NOT HAVEANDING.
>> Ifill: TO BE CLEAR, EVEN
THOUGH AS I SAID THIS IS GOOD
NEWS FOR GAY RIGHTS ACTIVISTS,
THIS IS NOT THE COURT SAYING
THAT GAY MARRIAGE ITSELF,
SAME-SEX MARRIAGE IS
CONSTITUTIONAL.
>> NO, IT WAS PRETTY CLEAR AFTER
THE ORAL ARGUMENTS BACK IN
FEBRUARY THAT THE COURT WAS NOT
GOING TO ANNOUNCE A NATIONAL
RIGHT TO MARRIAGE BY SAME-SEX
COUPLES.
BUT IT WAS -- THIS WAS A VICTORY
FIRST OF ALL.
THE DOMA CHALLENGE, THAT WAS
RAISED AS WHETHER DOMA WAS
CONSTITUTIONAL AS APPLIED TO
LEGALLY MARRIED SAME-SEX COUPLES
AND THE COURT SAID THAT IT WAS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL AS APPLIED TO
THEM.
JUSTICE KENNEDY LOOKED AT HOW
STATES HAVE HAD THE AUTHORITY
SINCE THE BEGINNING OF OUR
NATION TO REGULATE AND DEFINE
MARRIAGE.
CONGRESS, HE SAID, CAN LEGISLATE
IN A LIMITED WAY IN THIS AREA
BUT DOMA REACHES FAR BEYOND
THAT.
IT APPLIES TO OVER 1,000 FEDERAL
LAWS.
AND HE ALSO FOUND THAT WHAT NEW
YORK STATE FOR EDITH WINDSOR WAS
TRYING TO PROTECT, PEOPLE IT WAS
TRYING TO PROTECT, DOMA INJURED.
BECAUSE IT IMPOSED DISADVANTAGES
AND A STIGMA ON LEGALLY MARRIED
SAME-SEX COUPLES.
>> Ifill: BUT NOTHING THAT THE
COURT DID TODAY WOULD PROHIBIT A
STATE IF IT WANTED TO FRO THE
FROM PASSING A LAW BANNING OR
FORBIDDING GAY MARRIAGE?
>> NO, JUSTICE KENNEDY WAS
EXPLICIT IN HIS OPINION THAT IT
WAS CONFINED TO STATES THAT
RECOGNIZE LEGALLY MARRIED
SAME-SEX COUPLES.
>> Ifill: YET THERE WERE THREE
SEPARATE DISSENDING OPINIONS
ABOUT THIS AND JUSTICE SCALIA
WAS PARTICULARLY BLISTERING.
>> JUSTICE SCALIA READ A SUMMARY
OF HIS OPINION FROM THE BENCH
AND HE TOOK ISSUE WITH THE FACT
THAT THERE WAS A CONTROVERSY
BEFORE THE COURT.
HE WOULD HAVE FOUND THAT THERE
WAS NO CONTROVERSY IN AND THE
COURT WOULD NOT HAVE REACHED THE
MERITS.
ON THE MERITS HE WAS QUITE
PASSIONATE THAT THE COURT WAS
IMPOSING ITS OWN MORAL JUDGMENT
HERE AND NOT ALLOWING THE
CURRENT DEBATE OVER THE LEGALITY
OF SAME-SEX MARRIAGE OR THE
CONSTITUTIONALITY OF IT TO
PROCEED IN SOCIETY.
HE SAID "INSTEAD OF ALLOWING
SOCIETY TO ELECT CHANGE, THE
COURT IMPOSED CHANGE."
AND HE SAID THAT WAS ONLY FOR
THE COURT'S OWN
SELF-AGGRANDIZEMENT THAT IT WAS
STEPPING INTO THIS DEBATE.
AND IT WAS DOING A DISSERVICE,
HE SAID, TO BOTH SIDES OF THE
DEBATE BY NOT ALLOWING THEM
REACH A FINAL CONCLUSION.
>> Ifill: IS THERE A LEGAL
AVENUE-- EVEN THOUGH WE KNOW IN
CALIFORNIA TONIGHT THEY SAY
THEY'RE GOING TO WAIT 25 DAYS
AND ALLOW MARRIAGES TO BEGIN--
EITHER THROUGH PROP 8 OR THROUGH
DOMA FOR ANY OF THESE CHALLENGES
TO COME BACK TO THE COURT?
>> WELL, THERE COULD BE -- I
DON'T THINK ON THE SPECIFIC
GROUNDS THAT THE COURT RULED
HERE.
BUT JUSTICE SCALIA POINTED OUT
IN HIS DISSENT AND JUSTICE --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS ALSO
MENTIONED THAT THE ARGUMENTS
THAT JUSTICE KENNEDY MADE TO
KNOCK DOWN SECTION 3 OF DOMA--
STATES' AUTHORITY TO REGULATE
MARRIAGE-- MAY BE USED BY THOSE
WHO SUPPORT STATE BANS ON
MARRIAGE.
AND THAT MAY -- THAT ISSUE
ULTIMATELY MAY GET TO THE
SUPREME COURT.
>> SO MAYBE HE WAS HINTING
AROUND THIS IS THE WAY YOU CAN
BRING THIS BACK BUT NOT THE WAY
IT CAME TO US TODAY.
>> EXACTLY, EXACTLY.
>> Ifill: MARCIA COIL, IT'S
BEEN QUITE A RIDE.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Brown: WE'LL HAVE MORE ON
TODAY'S LANDMARK RULINGS LATER
IN THE PROGRAM.
ALSO AHEAD, VALLEY FEVEMADR E
WORSE BY HOT, DRY WEATHER; A
DRAMATIC FILIBUSTER OF AN
ABORTION BILL IN TEXAS AND
LOOMING PROTESTS IN EGYPT.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWOF TS HE
DAY.
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Holman: IMMIGRATION REFORM
EASILY PASSED ITS LATEST TESTS
IN THE U.S. SENATE TODAY.
A KEY BORDER SECURITY AMENDMENT
WON FORMAL APPROVAL.
IT DOUBLES THE BORDER PATROL,
AMONG OTHER STEPS.
AND, SUPPORTERS OF GAY RIGHTS
DROPPED AN AMENDMENT TO LET
AMERICANS SPONSOR SAME-SEX
SPOUSES FOR ADMISSION TO THE
U.S.
THE PROPOSAL WAS POTENTIALLY
DIVISIVE, BUT VERMONT DEMOCRAT
PATRICK LEAHY SAID IT'S NO
LONGER NECESSARY, GIVEN TODAY'S
SUPREME COURT DECISIONS.
>> IT APPEARS THAT THE ANTI-
DISCRIMINATION PRINCIPLE THAT I
HAVE LONG ADVOCATED WILL APPLY
TO OUR IMMIGRATION LAWS AND TO
BI-NATIONAL COUPLES AND THEIR
FAMILIES CAN NOW BE UNITED UNDER
THE LAW.
AS A RESULT OF THIS VERY WELCOME
DECISION, I WILL NOT BE SEEKING
A FLOOR VOTE ON MY AMENDMENT.
>> Holman: EVEN OPPONENTS OF THE
BILL ACKNOWLEDGED IT IS LIKELY
HEADED FOR FINAL PASSAGE, BY
FRIDAY.
BUT REPUBLICAN DAN COATS OF
INDIANA SAID HE STILL DOUBTS THE
BILL WILL LIVE UP TO ITS
PROMISE, DESPITE SOME HELPFUL
ADDITIONS.
>> THE EMPLOYEE VERIFICATION HAS
BEEN STRENGTHENED, BORDER
SECURITY HAS BEEN STRENGTHENED,
THE EXIT VISA PROBLEM HAS BEEN
STRENGTHENED, IF THE PROMISES
COME TRUE.
BUT THEY'VE ONLY BEEN
STRENGTHENED ON A PIECE OF
PAPER, AND WE NEED TO SEE IT
STRENGTHENED FOR REAL.
>> Holman: THE SENATE'S NEWEST
MEMBER WILL NOT ARRIVE SOON
ENOUGH TO VOTE ON THE BILL.
DEMOCRAT EDWARD MARKEY WON A
SPECIAL ELECTION IN
MASSACHUSETTS YESTERDAY.
EE'LL BE SWORN IN AFTER TH
FOURTH OF JULY RECESS,
SUCCEEDING JOHN KERRY, WHO'S NOW
THE SECRETARY OF STATE.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS EMBARKED ON
A WEEK-LONG TRIP TO AFRICA.
ARHERIVED THIS EVENING IN
DAKAR, SENEGAL, BEGINNING
HIS SECOND VISIT TO SUB-SAHARAN
AFRICA SINCE TAKING OFFICE.
THE PRESIDENT IS ALSO SCHEDULED
TO MAKE STOPS IN SOUTH AFRICA
AND TANZANIA.
THE VISIT COMES AS FORMER SOUTH
AFRICAN PRESIDENT NELSON MANDELA
REMAINS HOSPITALIZED IN PRETORIA
IN CRITICAL CONDITION.
FEDERAL AGENTS TODAY LAUNCHED
THE LARGEST CRACKDOWN YET ON
MAKERS OF SYNTHETIC DESIGNER
DRUGS.
THEY SERVED 150 ARREST WARRANTS
AND SEIZED 2,000 POUNDS OF
CHEMICALS USED IN SYNTHETIC
MARIJUANA, BATH SALTS AND OTHER
DRUGS, ACROSS 35 STATES.
MEANWHILE, THE U.N. DRUG CONTROL
AGENCY WARNED THE SPREAD OF
DESIGNER DRUGS IS GETTING OUT OF
CONTROL.
IT SAID NEW VARIANTS APPEAR
FASTER THAN GOVERNMENTS CAN BAN
THEM.
B.P. HAS LAUNCHED AN AGGRESSIVE
CAMPAIGN TO CHALLENGE ALLEGED
OVER-PAYMENTS IN ITS GULF OIL
SPILL SETTLEMENT.
IN FULL PAGE ADS TODAY, THE OIL
GIANT CHARGED TRIAL LAWYERS AND
POLITICIANS HAVE ENCOURAGED
BUSINESSES TO SUBMIT CLAIMS FOR
INFLATED OR NON-EXISTENT LOSSES.
B.P. ALSO SAID IT'S SENDING
HUNDREDS OF WARNING LETTERS TO
BUSINESSES.
THE COMPANY FACES THOUSANDS OF
CLAIMS.
POPE FRANCIS CREATED A SPECIAL
COMMISSION TODAY TO REVIEW THE
VATICAN BANK, AMID NEW
ALLEGATIONS OF MONEY-LAUNDERING.
IT WAS THE LATEST STEP IN THE
PONTIFF'S EFFORTS TO REFORM THE
HIGHLY-SECRETIVE FINANCIAL
INSTITUTION.
LEAKED DOCUMENTS LAST YEAR TOLD
OF DYSFUNCTION AND CORRUPTION
WITHIN THE BANK.
THE NEW, FIVE-MEMBER COMMISSION
IS TO REPORT DIRECTLTO TY HE
POPE, BYPASSING THE VATICAN
BUREAUCRACY.
WALL STREET RALLIED FOR A SECOND
STRAIGHT DAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED NEARLY 150 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 14,910.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 28 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3,376.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JEFF.
>> Brown: AND WE RETURN TO THE
MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS AT THE COURT
TODAY WITH A LOOK AT THE LEGAL
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE RULINGS.
FOR THAT WE ARE JOINED BY MARY
BONAUTO, SPECIAL COUNSEL FOR THE
GROUP GAY AND LESBIAN ADVOCATES
AND DEFENDERS.
SHE HAS LITIGATED CASES AGAINST
THE "DEFENSE OF MARRIAGE" ACT.
AND AUSTIN NIMOCKS, SENIOR
COUNSEL FOR THE ALLIANCE
DEFENDING FREEDOM, A
CONSERVATIVE CHRISTIAN LEGAL
ORGANIZATION.
HE WAS CO-COUNSEL FOR THE
SUPPORTERS OF PROPOSITION 8 THIS
YEAR.
MARY BONAUTO, LET ME START WITH
YOU.
TAKEN TOGETHER, HOW MUCH OF AN
ENDORSEMENT OF GAY MARRIAGE DO
YOU READ INTO THESE DECISIONS
TODAY?
>> I READ SOME AND I SAY THAT
BECAUSE WITH RESPECT TO DOMA WE
ARE NOW REPLACING A SYSTEM THAT
OFFICIALLY DISRESPECTED THE
LEGAL MARRIAGES OF SAME-SEX
COUPLES FOR OVER A THOUSAND
FEDERAL PURPOSES AND REPLACING
IT WITH FEDERAL RESPECT FOR
THOSE MARRIAGES.
SO THAT'S OBVIOUSLY AN IMPORTANT
ENDORSEMENT.
THE OPINION COULDN'T HAVE BEEN
CLEARER THAT THIS LAW SAYING
ONLY MARRIAGES OF SAME-SEX
COUPLES WOULD BE DISRESPECTED
DEMEANED THE RELATIONSHIPS THAT
THE STATES HAD MEANT TO CONFER
DIGNITY AND RESPECT AND DOMA WAS
TAKING THAT AWAY AND HURTING
PEOPLE.
AND IT DOES HURT PEOPLE WHEN
THEY CAN'T GET A FAMILY POLICY
OF HEALTH INSURANCE OR FILE
THEIR TAXES JOINTLY.
BUT IT ALSO HURTS MUCH MORE IN
THE WAY THE COURT REALLY PICKED
UP IN TERMS OF SAYING THIS WAS
REALLY A WAY OF SAYING GAY
PEOPLE AND THEIR FAMILIES ARE
UNWORTHY.
>> Brown: SAME QUESTION TO
YOU.
I WANT TO GET THIS GENERAL
PROPOSITION AND WALK THROUGH THE
DETAILS.
HOW BROAD A READ DOG YOU MAKE OF
TODAY?
>> I THINK IF ANY ENDORSEMENT
CAN BE TAKEN FROM TODAY'S
DECISIONS IT'S ANN ENDORSEMENT
OF THE RIGHT OF THE STATES TO
DEBATE AND DECIDE THE QUESTION
OF MARRIAGE.
STRIKING DOWN DOMA, THE COURT
SAID WE NEED TO DEFER TO THE
STATES THAT HAVE TRADITIONALLY
HAD THE PROVINCE HERE.
SO WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT THIS
ISSUE IS GOING T TO CONTINUE TOE
DEBATED AND DECIDED BY PEOPLE AT
THE STATE LEVEL WITH THEIR STATE
REPRESENTATIVES AND THEIR STATE
PROVISIONS FOR DEALING WITH
THESE QUESTIONS AND SO THE
QUESTION NOW GOES FROM THE
SUPREME COURT BACK TO THE PEOPLE
IN THEIR VARIOUS STATES.
>> Ifill>> Brown: ON DOMA ITSEL,
YOU'RE NOT SEEING THE KIND OF
SWEEPING DECISION THAT MARY
BONAUTO IS SAYING.
YOU'RE SAYING IT SEND IT TO
STATES AGAIN?
>> THE SUPREME COURT CLEARLY
STRUCK DOWN DOMA AND THE REASON
THE SUPREME COURT SAID THEY'RE
STRIKING IT DOWN IS BECAUSE THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS
TRADITIONALLY DEFERRED TO THE
STATES.
SO IF A STATE DECLARES SOMEBODY
IS BEING MARRIED, THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT NEEDS TO RECOGNIZE
THAT.
SO IT RECENTRACENTRALLIZES POWEO
THE DEFINITION OF MARRIAGE TO
THE STATES.
>> Brown: WHERE DO YOU THINK
IT LEAVES THINGS?
>> I THINK THAT'S A SLIGHT
OVERREADING HERE BECAUSE THE
COURT NOTED THAT STATES
TRADITIONALLY SAY IF SOMEBODY'S
EXTREMELY UNUSUAL-- THE FIRST
TIME EVER IN HISTORY-- THAT THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS STEPPED
IN AND WIPED OUT A CLASS OF
MARRIAGES.
THAT WAS WHAT WAS UNUSUAL.
BUT THE COURT COULDN'T HAVE BEEN
CLEARER THAT WHILE STATES
REGULATE MARRIAGE THEY'RE
SUBJECT TO THE CONSTITUTION AND
THAT'S WHY I THINK THE ISSUE
WILL BE BACK AT THE COURT
PROBABLY IN SHORT ORDER BECAUSE
IF THERE'S A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT
TO MARRY AND THE COURT HAS SAID
SO 14 TIMES THE QUESTION REMAINS
WHY IS IT THAT FUNDAMENTAL
FREEDOM IS BEING DENIED TO
COMMITTED LOVING GAY AND LESBIAN
COUPLES.
>> Brown: WE HEARD FROM GWEN
AND MARCIA TALKING ABOUT THE
FACT THAT THE COURT DID NOT RULE
ON WHETHER THERE IS A
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT TO GAY
MARRIAGE.
WAS THAT A DISAPPOINTMENT?
DID YOU WANT IT TO GO THAT FAR?
>> WELL, IN THE DOMA SITUATION
THAT WAS SPECIFICALLY NOT AT
ISSUE.
IT WAS ABOUT DOMA ITSELF AND
I'VE -- AND WITH RESPECT TO THE
PROPOSITION 8 ISSUE, YOU KNOW,
IF THE COURT HAD GONE IN THAT
DIRECTION SO BE IT.
BUT I THINK THE HANDWRITING WAS
ON THE WALL THAT THE STATE
ITSELF HAD NOT APPEALED IN
CALIFORNIA, THE PROPER PARTIES
WERE NOT FROM FRONT OF THE COURT
SO TO ME IT'S A GREAT VICTORY
THAT MARRIAGE IS BEING RESTORED
TO CALIFORNIA.
>> Brown: HOW DO YOU READ THE
PROPOSITION 8 DECISION, ONE YOU
WERE VERY MUCH A PART OF?
>> WE'RE DISAPPOINTED THE
SUPREME COURT DETERMINED WE
DIDN'T HAVE STANDING TO DEFEND
PROPOSITION 8.
BUT ULTIMATELY OUR OPPONENTS
DIDN'T FILE THAT LAWSUIT TO
PROVE WE DIDN'T HAVE STANDING.
THEY FILED THE LAWSUIT IN ORDER
TO IMPOSE 50 SAME-SEX MARRIAGE
SOLUTION ON THE ENTIRE COUNTRY.
AND THEY WERE UNSUCCESSFUL.
THE 9th CIRCUIT'S OPINION
STRIKING DOWN PROPOSITION 8 WAS
VACATED AND SENDS IT BACK TO
CALIFORNIA AND WE'RE VERY HAPPY
ABOUT THAT THAT THE SUPREME
COURT DID NOT ACT WITH A HEAVY
HAND.
THAT'S WHAT WE'VE BEEN SAYING
ALL ALONG.
THE SUPREME COURT DOESN'T NEED
TO ACT WITH A HEAVY HAND HERE,
IT NEEDS TO TAKE A MORE MUTED
APPROACH AND NOT TRY TO RESOLVE
THIS FOR THE ENTIRE COUNTRY.
>> Brown: IS IT CLEAR IN YOUR
MIND WHERE THIS LEAVES THINGS IN
CALIFORNIA?
DOES IT, IN FACT, OPEN THE DOOR
FOR GAUGES TO GO FORWARD?
>> IT'S NOT CLEAR AT ALL AT THIS
JUNCTURE WHAT TYPE OF LEGAL
CIRCUMSTANCE REMAINS IN
CALIFORNIA AND THERE'S A 25-DAY
WINDOW THAT WILL BE CONSIDERED
IN TERMS OF WHAT HAPPENS NOW,
WHAT GOES FORWARD.
BECAUSE THERE IS NO APPELLATE
COURT DECISION HOLDING
PROPOSITION 8 UNCONSTITUTIONAL
AND SO IT'S A LEGITIMATE
QUESTION.
WE'RE STILL LOOKING AT THE
OPINIONS, OTHER LEGAL SCHOLARS
ARE LOOKING AT THE OPINIONS AND
WE'LL SEE COMING FORWARD WHAT
MAY HAPPEN WITH THAT.
>> Brown: HAVE YOU HAD A
CHANCE TO LOOK AT THAT?
>> MY SENSE IS THAT MARRIAGE IS
GOING TO HAPPEN STATEWIDE IN
CALIFORNIA.
THE REGISTRAR OF CALIFORNIA WAS
A DEFENDANT IN THAT CASE AND IS
DIRECTED TO CONTROL THE COUNTY
OFFICIALS WHO CONTROL MARRIAGE
LICENSES.
SO I HAVE BEEN BEEN THROUGH SOME
OF THIS WHERE PEOPLE TRY TO
RESTRICT A RULING AND SO ON BUT
I SUSPECT WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
MARRIAGE IN CALIFORNIA IN A
LITTLE OVER A MONTH.
>> Brown: ARE YOU SUGGESTING
THERE WILL BE LEGAL -- SOME KIND
OF LEGAL ACTION IN THE NEXT 20
DAYS OR MONTHS?
>> IT'S CERTAINLY POSSIBLE.
WHAT WE DON'T HAVE RIGHT NOW IS
A LOT OF CLARITY WITH REGARD TO
IT AND SO I KNOW THAT, YOU KNOW,
THE TWO BIG SUPREME COURT
OPINIONS WITH ALL THE THINGS
I'VE SAID A LOT TO DIGEST IN A
FEW HOURS BUT I THINK IN THE
DAYS COMING THERE WILL BE MORE
CLARITY AS FAR AS THAT'S
CONCERNED.
>> Brown: I WANT TO THINK
ABOUT WHERE THINGS GO NEXT.
WHAT ABOUT IN STATES THAT JUST
HAVE CIVIL UNION RIGHT NOW.
IS THERE ANYTHING OUT OF TODAY'S
ACTION THAT MIGHT HAVE AN IMPACT
FOR THOSE STATES?
>> MODESTLY, YES.
>> MODESTLY.
>> FOR THE MOST PART THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT HAS A SYSTEM BASED ON
MARRIAGE.
THAT'S THE PRIMARY RELATIONSHIP
THAT IT RESPECTS, ALTHOUGH IT
DOES ALSO RESPECT SOME OTHER
RELATIONSHIPS AND THERE ARE SOME
PROGRAMS THAT, AGAIN, WHEN YOU
DELVE INTO THE DETAILS WHERE THE
STATUTES ARE CLEAR THAT IF YOU
HAVE CERTAIN OBLIGATIONS TO ONE
ANOTHER, CERTAIN RIGHTS UNDER
STATE LAW YOU WOULD BE PROTECT
SOD THERE WILL BE SOME --
>> Pelley: WITH A LEGAL
REASONING FROM THESE CASES MIGHT
APPLY IN THOSE CASES?
>> YES.
YES.
>> DO YOU SEE THAT POSSIBILITY?
>> I DON'T SEE THAT AS A
POSSIBILITY BECAUSE THE
PROPOSITION 8 DECISION FROM THE
DISTRICT COURT WAS SO SPECIFIC
ASTO T HE STATE OF CALIFORNIA
AND EVERY STATE HAS COME ABOUT
ITS LAWS IN COMPLETELY DIFFERENT
WAYS.
SOME STATES HAVE MARRIAGE LAWS
THAT WERE ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE.
OTHERS VOTED ON BY THE CITIZENRY
SO I DON'T SEE A LOT OF
TRANSPORTABLE PRECEDENT AS FAR
AS THAT IS CONCERNED.
WHAT WE CAN AGREE ON IS THAT THE
STATES ARE GOING TO HAVE THE
RIGHT TO CONTINUE TO DEAL WITH
MARRIAGE THROUGH THEIR
DEMOCRATIC PROCESSES AND I THINK
THAT'S THE MOST IMPORTANT TAKE
AWAY.
>> Brown: GO AHEAD.
>> YES, THAT IS ALL TRUE AND
IT'S A DEBATE THAT OBVIOUSLY HAS
BEEN -- OUR COUNTRY HAS BEEN
ENGAGED IN AT EVERY LEVEL AND
THAT'S A TERRIFIC THING.
AT THE SAME TIME THE COURT IS
CLEAR THAT EVERY STATE LAW IS,
OF COURSE, SUBJECT TO OUR
CONSTITUTIONAL GUARANTEES.
THAT'S WHY, YOU KNOW, VIRGINIA'S
ANTIMISCEGENATION LAW HAD TO
FALL WHEN IT DID.
ULTIMATELY THE COURT IS THE ONE
TO SAY IF A STATE IS ENACTING
ITS MARRIAGE LAW HAS DRAWN THE
WRONG LINE.
>> Brown: SO WHERE DO YOU SEE
THE FIGHT GOING NEXT?
IS IT A LOT OF LEGAL BATTLES?
ARE THEY POLITICAL BATTLES?
IS IT STILL A MIX OF BOTH AS
WE'VE SEEN FOR MANY YEARS?
>> I THINK IT'S A MIX OF BOTH
BUT I HAVE TO SAY THAT I THINK
THIS ISSUE WILL RETURN TO THE
COURT.
I THINK YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE
STATES WHERE THIS DEBATE
CONTINUES.
I THINK YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE
STATES GOING BACK TO THE BALLOT
TO REPEAL SOME OF THOSE HASTILY
ENACTED CONSTITUTIONAL BANS.
I THINK YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE
STATE COURT DECISIONS AND THERE
ARE A NUMBER OF FEDERAL COURT
CASES ALREADY PENDING.
>> Brown: WHEN YOU SAY "RETURN
TO THE COURT" DO YOU MEAN THE
SUPREME COURT?
>> I MEAN THAT COURT, YES.
>> WHA >> Brown: WHAT DO YOU THK
ABOUT THE PROSPECTS OF THAT?
>> I AGREE WITH MARE THEY THE
PROCESS WILL CONTINUE.
PROBABLY SOME COURTROOM OF AND
WE CAN AGREE ON THAT I THINK THE
MARRIAGE DEBATE WILL CONTINUE IN
THIS COUNTRY.
THE SUPREME COURT DIDN'T SETTLE
IT NOR DID IT TRY TO SETTLE IT
IN ITS ENTIRETY.
SO THERE'S GOING TO BE A MIX OF
DIFFERENT THINGS HAPPENING.
BUT AMERICANS WHO ARE -- AS
JUSTICE SCALIA TODAYED TODAY,
DEEPLY INVESTED IN THIS ISSUE
GOING TO CONTINUE TO VOICE THEIR
OPINIONS.
>> Brown: AUSTIN HIM KNOX,
MARY BONAUTO, THANK YOU.
ONLINE, JUST WHAT ARE THE
BENEFITS THAT LEGALLY MARRIED
GAY COUPLES WILL NOW BE ABLE TO
RECEIVE?
WE HAVE A LIST OF SOME OF THOSE
ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
AND WE HAVE MORE REACTION FROM
CALIFORNIA FROM THE "NEWSHOUR'S"
SPENCER MICHELS' COVERAGE AT SAN
FRANCISCO CITY HALL THIS
MORNING.
>> Ifill: NEXT, AN OFTEN
UNDIAGNOSED DISEASE KNOWN AS
VALLEY FEVER IS SPREADING
THROUGHOUT THE SOUTHWEST.
RAY IS BACK WITH OUR SCIENCE
STORY.
>> Reporter: THE MOJAVE DESERT
IS KNOWN FOR EXTREME HEAT AND
FIERCE WIND.
RECENT YEARS OF HOTTER AND DRIER
SEASONS HAVE ONLY INTENSIFIED
THOSE CONDITIONS.
DRIVERS SOMETIMES NEED
HEADLIGHTS TO NAVIGATE THROUGH
THICK DUST STORMS.
YOU MIGHT THINK OF A BLAST OF
GRITTY BREEZE AS UNCOMFORTABLE,
RATHER THAN THREATENING, BUT
WESTERNERS HAVE GOOD REASON TO
WORRY ABOUT WHAT THAT WIND IS
CARRYING.
BIOLOGIST ANTJIE LAUER IS AT THE
DESERT'S WESTERN EDGE-- THE NASA
DRYDEN CENTER-- TO STUDY ONE
TINY LOCAL INHABITANT SHE
SUSPECTS IS ACTUALLY BENEFITING
FROM PROLONGED DROUGHT-- A
MICROSCOPIC FUNGUS CALLED
COCCIDIODES OR COCCI.
>> THEY ADAPT TO DESERT SOILS.
SO THEY CAN TOLERATE HIGH
TEMPERATURES.
HIGHER P.H. LEVELS.
I TAKE A SAMPLE A LITTLE DEEPER
FROM THE SOIL, BECAUSE I WANT TO
FIND A SPOT WHERE THE PLANT IS
ACTUALLY GROWING, AND NOT JUST
BLOWINTON  THE SITE.
>> Reporter: WHILE CONTA INUED
DROUGHT MAY BE GOOD NEWS FOR THE
COCCI FUNGUS, IT'S VERY BAD NEWS
FOR HUMANS, BECAUSE THIS FUNGUS
CAN BE DEADLY.
ALL IT TAKES IS A GUST OF WIND.
WHEN THE FUNGUS BECOMES AIRBORNE
IT'S EASILY INHALED.
ONCE IN MOIST LUNGS, IT CAN
CAUSE AN INFECTION CALLED VALLEY
FEVER.
THE INFECTION CAN CAUSE ILLNESS
RANGING FROM FLU LIKE SYMPTOMS
TO SEVERE PNEUMONIA, EVEN DEATH.
>> WE WILL ALTER THE EXTRACT
D.N.A. FROM THE SOIL AND TRY TO
FIND THE FUNGUS GROWING IN IT,
IN THE LAB.
>> Reporter: VALLEY FEVER IS NOT
CONTAGIOUS, AND IT IS NOT NEW TO
PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN CALIFORNIA
AND ARIZONA DESERTS,
PARTICULARLY THOSE WHO WORK
OUTSIDE.
BUT THE C.D.C. REPORTED THIS
MARCH THAT THE NUMBER OF VALLEY
FEVER CASES IN ENDEMIC AREAS
SOARED BETWEEN 1998-2011 FROM
2,000 TO OVER 24,000.
>> WE HAVE ABOUT 900% INCREASE
IN VALLEY FEVER CASES, AND
PEOPLE TRY TO SPECULATE WHY THAT
IS THE CASE, AND ONE HYPOTHESIS
THAT I'M PURSUING IS THAT THE
DRAUGHT IS ACTUALLY FAVORING, OR
THE CONTINUOUS DROUGHT IS
FAVORING ANY SPORE FORMED IN THE
SOIL, WHICH INCLUDES THE VALLEY
FEVER FUNGUS, AND IT OUTCOMPETES
ALL THE MICROORGANISMS THAT ARE
NOT EASILY FORMING SPORES.
>> Reporter: WHILE ANTJE LAUER
LOOKS AT THE COCCIS ABILITY TO
THRIVE IN DRY SOIL, SCIENTIST
VIC ETYEMAZIAN, FROM ARIZONA'S
DESERT RESEARCH INSTITUTE,
EXPLORES THE ROLE OF DUST IN
VALLEY FEVERS DRAMATIC RISE.
>> VALLEY FEVER IS VERY MUCH A
SORT OF A DUST-RELATED EVENT, IF
YOU HAVE MUCH MORE ABUNDANT
AREAS WHERE VALLEY FEVER SPORES
CAN BE SUSPENDED IN THE AIR,
THEN YOU CAN IMAGINE THAT THE
EXPOSURE FOR PEOPLE CAN GO UP TO
THE FUTURE.
>> Reporter: ETYEMAZIAN AND A
COLLEAGUE MOVE MEASURING DEVICES
PROPELLED BY A BABY JOGGER
ACROSS THE RUTTED DESERT
LANDSCAPE.
>> WHAT WE'RE DOING IS MEASURING
THE POTENTIAL FOR WIND EROSION
AND THE POTENTIAL FOR DUST
EMISSION AT DIFFERENT EQUIVALENT
WIND SPEEDS.
SO WE'RE TRYING TO UNDERSTAND IF
THE WIND IS BLOWING AT SAY 35
MILES AN HOUR, WHICH OF THESE
AREAS IS MOST SUSCEPTIBLE TO...
TO DUST BECOMING AIRBORNE.
AND THIS INSTRUMENT WE HAVE IS
SOMETHING LIKE A WIND TUNNEL,
IT'S A VERY COMPACT VERSION OF A
WIND TUNNEL, AND THAT'S EXACTLY
WHAT IT DOES.
IT SIMULATES HIGHER WIND SPEEDS
AND AS THE WIND SPEED GETS
HIGHER, YOU MEASURE THE DUST AND
>> Reporter: THE SCIENTISTS ARE
PART OF A BIGGER PROJECT FUNDED
BY NASA TO STUDY POSSIBLE
IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON
NASA CENTERS.
CLIMATE CHANGE IS NOT THE ONLY
SUSPECT IN THE INCREASED
ILLNESSES.
YOU ALSO HAVE TO TAKE INTO
ACCOUNT THE HUMAN FOOTPRINT ON
THE LAND.
THESE DAYS THE DESERT SPROUTS
SUBDIVISIONS, SHOPPING CENTERS,
AND OIL DERRICKS AND EVERY TIME
YOU DISTURB THE LAND YOU CAN
RELEASE THE COCCI SPORE INTO A
STIFF WIND LIKE THIS ONE, AND
THEY CAN TRAVEL 75 MILES.
90 MILES NORTHWEST, AT THE EDGE
OF THE DESERT IN FAST GROWING
BAKERSFIELD CALIFORNIA,
INFECTIOUS DISEASE SPECIALIST DR
ROYCE JOHNSON, AN EXPERT ON
VALLEY FEVER, SAYS ANYONE CAN
GET SICK, EVEN IF YOU JUST DRIVE
THROUGH A DESERT AREA.
>> ALL YOU HAVE TO DO IS TAKE A
BREATH AT THE WRONG TIME, IT'LL
IMPACT YOUR LOWER LUNG, AND THE
INFECTION STARTS FROM THERE, AND
CAN SPREAD ANYWHERE IT WANTS TO
IN THE BODY.
YOU CAN ROLL DOWN THE WINDOW
DRIVING ON I-5 AND YOU COULD BE
DRIVING FROM SAN DIEGO TO
SEATTLE, YOU COULD CATCH COCCI
WHILE YOU'RE DRIVING THROUGH, NO
QUESTION.
THAT CAN HAPPEN AND HAS
HAPPENED.
>> Reporter: JOHNSON SAYS SO
LITTLE IS KNOWN ABOUT VALLEY
FEVER IT IS STILL UNCLEAR WHY
REACTIONS TO THE INFECTION ARE
SO VARIED.
>> MOST PEOPLE IN FACT WILL
SUCCESSFULLY FIGHT OFF THE
INFECTION, AND HAVE NO SYMPTOMS,
AND HAVE LIFELONG IMMUNITY FROM
IT.
ABOUT 40% OF THE PEOPLE THAT ARE
INFECTED GET A FLU LIKE ILLNESS.
>> Reporter: FOR A SMALL
FRACTION OF THE POPULATION--
PEOPLE LIKE AL ROUNTREE-- THE
CONDITION CAN BE LIFE
THREATENING.
HIS LUNGS BECAME SO INFLAMED, HE
WAS PUT ON BREATHING MACHINE IN
THE I.C.U.
>> I THOUGHT I WAS DYING.
THAT FIRST WEEKEND, I THOUGHT, I
MEAN I THOUGHT FOR SURE.
I'VE BEEN SICK A LOT, BUT
NOTHING LIKE, I'VE NEVER BEEN
THIS SICK IN MY LIFE, AND LIKE I
SAID, I'VE HAD A LOT OF THINGS
HAPPEN, BUT I'VE NEVER BEEN THIS
SICK IN MY LIFE, AND IT'S JUST
DEVASTATING.
>> Reporter: NOW, AFTER MONTHS
OF INTENSIVE INFUSIONS OF AN
ANTIFUNGAL DRUG THAT IS VERY
TOUGH ON THE BODY, ROUNTREE IS
ON THE MEND.
>> WE'LL TRANSITION YOU TO AN
ORAL DRUG AND WELL PROBABLY
TREAT YOU FOR THE NEXT THREE
YEARS OR SO...
>> Reporter: AL ROUNTREE'S
INFECTION WAS CONFINED TO HIS
LUNGS.
VALLEY FEVER IS MOST DANGEROUS
WHEN THE FUNGUS SPREADS, OR
DISSEMINATES, THAT CONDITION IS
OFTEN FATAL.
SINCE 1990, MORE THAN 3,000
PEOPLE HAVE DIED.
>> IF IT GOES TO YOUR BRAIN IT
PRODUCES MENINGITIS THAT CAN
KILL YOU BY A VARIETY OF
MECHANISMS.
IT CAN ALSO KILL YOU IF IT GOES
THROUGH THE BLOOD STREAM, AND
GOES BACK TO YOUR LUNG, AND YOU
GET RESPIRATORY FAILURE, YOU CAN
END UP ON A VENTILATOR IN THE
I.C.U., AND THEN IT CAN ALSO
KILL YOU SORT OF LIKE CANCER
DOES, YOU CAN JUST WASTE AWAY
FROM HAVING A LOT OF DISEASE,
AND NOT BEING ABLE TO CONTROL
IT.
>> Reporter: WHILE PEOPLE WITH
WEAKER IMMUNE SYSTEMS ARE MORE
VULNERABLE, IT IS NOT KNOW WHY
SOME HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS CAN GET
JUST AS SICK.
>> SO THIS THING BURST OPEN AND
THEN THEY DO THE SAME THING:
>> Reporter: DR. JOHNSON SAYS
MUCH OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC AND
MANY PHYSICIANS HAVE NEVER HEARD
OF VALLEY FEVER, LEADING TO
PATIENTS GOING UNTREATED AS THE
DISEASE WORSENS, OR GETTING
TREATMENT FOR THE WRONG ILLNESS.
>> I TELL MY MEDICAL STUDENTS
THAT THEY WILL KNOW MORE THAN
99.9% OF ALL THE PHYSICIANS THAT
EVER LIVED ABOUT THIS DISEASE.
>> Reporter: HIGHER PROFILE
ILLNESSES LIKE WEST NILE VIRUS
RECEIVE 20 TIMES AS MUCH IN
FEDERAL FUNDING, EVEN THOUGH
MORE PEOPLE GET SICK FROM VALLEY
FEVER.
>> WEST NILE VIRUS CAME TO THE
UNITED STATES IN NEW YORK CITY--
ONE OF THE WORLD'S MOST FAMOUS
METROPOLISES.
IT ALSO HAS MULTIPLE MEDICAL
SCHOOLS.
BUT NEW YORK CITY, BAKERSFIELD,
TUCSON, MAYBE NOT EQUIVALENT IN
TERMS OF INTERNATIONAL
NOTORIETY.
I THINK RESOURCES WERE PUT
TOGETHER BECAUSE OF WHERE THIS
>> Reporter: ANTJE LAUER AGREES.
>> THERE ARE NO VALLEY FEVER
CASES, AND THERE IS NO INCIDENTS
OF COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS ON THE
EAST COAST, WHERE ALL THE
POLITICIANS ARE SITTING, SO THEY
ARE NEVER READING ANYTHING IN
THE NEWS ABOUT VALLEY FEVER
AROUND WASHINGTON.
SO THEY ARE NOT THAT CONCERNED.
>> Reporter: THERE'S A LOT MORE
SCIENTISTS SAY THEY MUST KNOW
ABOUT COCCI SPORES: HOW THEY
GROW; WHERE THEY BLOW AS THE
TINY SPORE MAKES MORE AMERICANS
SICK.
>> Brown: A POSTSCRIPT TO RAY'S
REPORT:
THIS WEEK A FEDERAL JUDGE
ORDERED THE CALIFORNIA
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS TO
TRANSFER 3,000 OR MORE INMATES
AT HIGH RISK OF CONTRACTING
VALLEY FEVER.
ATTORNEYS SAY 18 INMATES HAVE
DIED IN THE PAST TWO YEARS FROM
COMPLICATIONS RELATED TO THE
DISEASE.
THE STATE HAS 90 DAYS TMOVEO
THEM FROM TWO PRISONS LOCATED IN
THE SAN JOAQUIN VALLEY.
ONLINE, YOU CAN FIND THE
C.D.C.'S LIST OF 10 THINGS YOU
SHOULD KNOW ABOUT VALLEY FEVER,
INCLUDING SYMPTOMS OF THE
DISEASE AND OTHER IMPORTANT
INFORMATION.
>> Ifill: NOW, HOW A LOCAL
BATTLE IN TEXAS OVER ABORTION
LEGISLATION ERUPTED INTO A
NATIONAL DEBATE.
CHAOS ERUPTED IN THE TEXAS STATE
SENATE LAST NIGHT, AS ABORTION-
RIGHTS BACKERS  THUNDERED THEIR
OPPOSITION TO TOUGH, NEW
RESTRICTIONS.
IN THE MIDST OF THE DIN,
MAJORITY REPUBLICANS INSISTED
THE BILL, WHICH WOULD HAVE
BANNED ABORTIONS AFTER 20 WEEKS
OF PREGNANCY, HAD PASSED.
BUT OFFICIAL RECORDS SHOWED THAT
DIDN'T HAPPEN UNTIL AFTER A
MIDNIGHT DEADLINE HAD COME AND
GONE.
JUST AFTER 3:00 A.M., LIEUTENANT
GOVERNOR DAVID DEWHURST, WHO
PRESIDED OVER THE SESSION,
CONCEDED DEFEAT.
>> REGRETTABLY, THE
CONSTITUTIONAL TIME FOR THE 83RD
LEGISLATURE HAD EXPIRED.
SENATE BILL 5 CANNOT BE SIGNED
IN THE PRESENCE OF THE SENATE AT
THIS TIME AND THEREFORE CANNOT
BE ENROLLED.
>> Ifill: THE BILL WOULD HAVE
REQUIRED CLINICS TO UPGRADE TO
SURGICAL-LEVEL CENTERS, AN
EXPENSE THAT WOULD HAVE CAUSED
MOST EXISTING FACILITIES TO
CLOSE.
HAD IT PASSED, TEXAS WOULD HAVE
JOINED  ALABAMA, ARKANSAS,
KANSAS, NORTH DAKOTA, AND
VIRGINIA-- ALL STATES THAT
RECENTLY ADOPTED STRINGENT NEW
ANTI-ABORTION LAWS.
THE CAMPAIGN TO DERAIL THE
MEASURE WAS THE BRAINCHILD
OF FORT WORTH DEMOCRAT WENDY
DAVIS, WHO DECLARED HER INTENT
TO TALK THE BILL TO DEATH.
>> IS IT STILL YOUR INTENTION TO
FILIBUSTER?
YES, MR. PRESIDENT...
>> Ifill: SPORTING PINK TENNIS
SHOES, DAVIS BEGAN SPEAKING AT
11:15 IN THE MORNING.
>> MEMBERS, I'M RISING ON THE
FLOOR TODAY TO HUMBLY GIVE A
VOICE TO THOUSANDS OF TEXANS WHO
HAVE BEEN IGNORED.
THESE ARE TEXANS WHO RELIED ON
THE MINORITY MEMBERS OF THIS
SENATE IN ORDER FOR THEIR VOICES
TO BE HEARD.
THESE VOICES HAVE BEEN SILENCED
>> Ifill: NEWS OF THE FILIBUSTER
QUICKLY GRABBED NATIONAL
ATTENTION ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND A
CATCHY HASHTAG.
THING SPECIAL IS
HAPPENING IN AUSTIN TONIGHT.
STAND WITH WENDY."
DAVIS CONTINUED SPEAKING FOR
NEARLY 11 HOURS AND HAD INTENDED
TO GO UNTIL MIDNIGHT.
>> LAWS ARE TO CREATE JUSTICE
FOR ALL.
WE ALSO RECEIVED THIS WRITTEN
TESTIMONY.
THERE'S A MEDICAL NECESSITY.
WOMEN NEED TIMELY ACCESS.
>> Ifill: BUT AROUND 10:00 P.M.,
REPUBLICANS FORCED AN END TO THE
FILIBUSTER, RULING DAVIS HAD
STRAYED OFF TOPIC.
THAT SPARKED NEARLY TWO HOURS OF
HEATED DEBATE, AS DEMOCRATS
RAISED PROCEDURAL QUESTIONS TO
DELAY A VOTE.
THEN, THE PROTESTERS CROWDED
INTO THE GALLERY TOOK OVER.
WHEN IT WAS FINALLY OFFICIAL
THAT THE BILL HAD BEEN BLOCKED,
DAVIS THANKED HER SUPPORTERS.
>> TODAY WAS AN EXAMPLE OF
GOVERNMENT FOR THE PEOPLE, BY
THE PEOPLE, AND OF THE PEOPLE.
>> Ifill: IT'S UNCLEAR WHAT WILL
>> Ifill: LATE TODAY TEXAS
GOVERNOR RICK PERRY CALLED A
SPECIAL SESSION TO ADDRESS THE
ABORTION BILL.
FO
FOR MORE ON THE HIGH NOON TEXAS
POLITICAL DRAMA, AS IT UNFOLDED,
WE TURN TO EVAN SMITH, EDITOR-
IN-CHIEF OF THE "TEXAS TRIBUNE."
SO GIVE ME A SENSE ABOUT HOW
THIS WENT FROM BEING A LOCAL
SHOWDOWN TO BEING A BIG NATIONAL
STORY.
>> YOU KNOW, IT'S AMAZING HOW IN
THE WORLD OF TECHNOLOGY THINGS
THIS NEVER WOULD HAVE GOTTEN THE
ATTENTION OF PEOPLE OUTSIDE OF
AUSTIN LET ALONE OUTSIDE OF
TEXAS BECOME NATIONAL AND
INTERNATIONAL STORIES.
WE LIVE STREAM IT HAD SENATE
DEBATE LAST NIGHT.
THE SENATE LIVE STREAMS THE
DEBATE THEMSELVES BUT WE PUT IT
OUT THERE IN A WAY THAT OTHER
MEDIA COULD EMBED THE VIDEO.
AND VERY QUICKLY WE HAD MORE
THAN 100,000 AND ULTIMATELY
ALMOST 190,000 PEOPLE FROM
AROUND THE WORLD WATCHING THIS
STORY.
MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE, SOCIAL
MEDIA AND YOUTUBE MADE IT
POSSIBLE FOR THIS STORY TO GO
INTERNATIONAL AND FOR WENDY
DAVIS TO BE THE LATEST FOLK HERO
TO COME OUT OF TEXAS.
>> Ifill: LET'S GO BACK A
MOMENT.
TELL US A LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT
WHAT THIS LEGISLATION WOULD HAVE
DONE.
IT WOULD HAVE CLOSED 32 OF 42
CLINICS THAT CURRENTLY EXIST,
PRACTICALLY?
>> WELL, THAT'S NOT ENTIRELY
CLEAR.
IT WOULD HAVE REQUIRED THE
ABORTION CLINICS-- AND THERE ARE
IN TO
UPGRADES TO THE STANDARD OF
AMBULATORYRG SAID
CLINICS WERE NOT REQUIRED TO
CLOSE, THEY JUST HAD TO MEET THE
STANDARD AND PAY THE MONEY TO
MAKE THE UPGRADE.
BUT ABORTION SUPPORTERS OR PRO
CHOICE -- THE PRO CHOICE SIDE OF
THIS SAID THAT THE BURDENS ON
THESE CLINICS WERE SO ONEROUS
THAT THE PRACTICAL RESULT WOULD
BE TO CLOSE THEM.
THE EXPECTATION WOULD BE THAT OF
THE 42 CLINICS YOU SHOULD THIS
BILL, AS MANY AS 37 WERE LIKELY
TO CLOSE, LEAVING JUST FIVE
ABORTION CLINICS IN THE ENTIRE
STATE OF TEXAS THAT WOULD BE
AVAILABLE UNDER THIS NEW LAW.
>> Ifill: EVAN, TELL US A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT WENDY DAVIS.
THIS IS NOT THE FIRST TIME SHE'S
FILIBUSTERED SOMETHING.
>> CORRECT, BACK IN THE 2011
LEGISLATIVE SESSION WHEN THEY
WERE GETTING READY TO CUT $4
BILLION FROM PUBLIC EDUCATION--
A HISTORIC CUT-- WENDY DAVIS
FILIBUSTERED AT THE END OF THE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION.
SHE TALKED THIS TO DEATH.
BASICALLY SHE WAS ABLE TO RUN
THE CLOCK OUT AS SHE WAS NOT
ABLE TO DO BY HERSELF YESTERDAY.
GOVERNOR PERRY CALLED A SPECIAL
SESSION, THEY CAME BACK IN, THEY
INSTITUTED THOSE EDUCATION CUTS
ANYWAY IN THE SPECIAL SESSION
BUT WENDY DAVIS BECAME SOMETHING
OF A FOLK HERO TWO YEARS AGO FOR
HAVING HAD THE BRASS TO STAND UP
TO THE POWER STRUCTURE IN TEXAS.
SHE WAS ONE PERSON BY HERSELF
SHE BASICALLY TALKED THOSE CUTS
TO DEATH.
SO COMING INTO THIS SESSION SHE
ALREADY HAD A REPUTATION FOR
BEING WILLING TO DO THAT AND,
YOU KNOW, LOOK, THE ABORTION
ISSUE IS ONE THAT DIVIDES TEXAS
AS IT DIVIDES MANY OTHER PLACES
AND WHEN THESE LAWS WERE
PROPOSED, NOT JUST THE UPGRADE
OF THE ABORTION CLINICS BUT ALSO
THE BAN AFTER 20 WEEKS, WENDY
DAVIS ANNOUNCED "I'M GOING TO DO
WHAT I CAN TO STOP THIS."
MADE THE POINT OF FILIBUSTERING
AGAIN.
AND, AGAIN, YOU AND I BOTH
REMEMBER THE MOVIE "BILLY JACK."
SHE IS BASICALLY STATE SENATOR
BI J FROM FORT WORTH.
SHE'S ASSUME ADD FOLK HERO
STATUS.
NOT SINCE ANNE RICHARDS HAS A
DEMOCRAT RISEN TO INTERNATIONAL
LEVEL OF ACCLAIM-- FOR GOOD OR
ILL-- THAT SHE HAS.
>> Ifill: IN THE END, DID SHE
AND OTHER DEMOCRATS OUTMANEUVER
REPUBLICANS?
BECAUSE THEY HAVE THE MAJORITY
AND THE PUBLIC OPINION BEHIND
THEM ON THIS.
>> YEAH, IT'S KIND OF AMAZING.
THERE ARE 95 REPUBLICANS OUT OF
150 IN THE TEXAS HOUSE.
19 REPUBLICANS OUT OF 31 IN THE
TEXAS SENATE WHERE WENDY DAVIS
SERVES.
REPUBLICANS ENJOY ALMOST A
SUPERMAJORITY IN BOTH HOUSES.
EVERY STATEWIDE ELECTED OFFICIAL
IS A REPUBLICAN.
IN FACT, NO DEMOCRAT HAS BEEN
ELECTED STATEWIDE IN TEXAS SINCE
1994.
THIS IS NOT JUST A RED STATE,
THIS IS A BLOOD RED STATE. AMAZS
WITH THOSE NUMBERS THAT THE
REPUBLICANS COULD NOT MANAGE TO
GET THIS THROUGH.
THE DEMOCRATS USED THE RULE BOOK
AS THEIR WEAPON.
THE ONLY WEAPON THEY HAD
AVAILABLE.
THEY SIMPLY OUTPLAYED THE
REPUBLICANS IN THIS CASE.
>> Ifill: THERE HAVE BEEN A
LOT OF THEATRICS.
I'VE BEEN FOLLOWING YOUR TWEETS
ON THIS AND IT SEEMS THERE WAS
ONE EPISODE IN WHICH WOMEN
SHOWED UP DRESSED AS CHARACTERS
FROM "MAD MEN"?
>> YEAH, YOU KNOW, THIS WEEK HAS
BEEN ONE FOR THE BOOKS IN TERMS
OF HOW THE PUBLIC INSERTED
THEMSELVES INTO THE PROCESS.
NOT JUST BY BEING MORE ENGAGED
THAN AT ANY TIME I'VE SEEN
BEFORE.
NOT JUST BY USING TWITTER AND
OTHER SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS TO
BUILD COMMUNITY AND TO ORGANIZE
AROUND THE THIS ISSUE.
BUT THE NUMBERS OF PEOPLE WHO
SHOWED UP IN VARIOUS STATES, IN
DRESS AND IN ORANGE SHIRTS TO
SIGNIFY THEIR PRO-CHOICE
LEANINGS AND, QUITE FRANKLY, THE
PRO-LIFE SIDE, THEY SHOWED UP IN
UEBL SHIRTS.
THEY DIDN'T SHOW UP IN QUITE THE
SAME NUMBERS.
THE PUBLIC'S LEVEL OF ENGAGEMENT
ON THIS ISSUE SHOULD GIVE HOPE
TO PEOPLE LIKE YOU AND ME WHO
THINK NO ONE IS PAYING
ATTENTION.
EVERYONE'S PAYING ATTENTION.
AND I COME BACK TO WHAT I SAID
AT THE BEGINNING.
BECAUSE OF TECHNOLOGY IN A
LITERAL SENSE THE WHOLE WORLD
WAS WATCHING.
THAT'S WHY THIS THING WAS SUCH A
SIGNIFICANT MOMENT FOR TEXAS AND
TEXAS POLITICS.
>> Ifill: WELL, WE KNOW FOR
SURE THAT GOVERNOR RICK PERRY IS
PAYING ATTENTION AND WE HEAR
THIS AFTERNOON THAT HE PLANS TO
TAKE ANOTHER WHACK AT THIS.
TELL US ABOUT HOW THAT WOULD
HAVE TO HAPPEN.
>> HE'S COMING BACK -- BRINGING
THEM BACK INTO SESSION ON
MONDAY, JULY 1.
AND HERE'S THE DEAL: THE
DEMOCRATS WERE ABLE TO USE THE
RULE BOOK TO RUN OUT THE CLOCK
THIS LAST TIME.
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO BE ABLE TO
USE THE RULE BOOK ALMOST
CERTAINLY TO RUN OUT THE CLOCK
THIS TIME.
THEY WON THE BATTLE, THEY WILL
ALMOST CERTAINLY LOSE THE WAR.
THEY CAN MARSHALL THE OPPOSITION
TO THIS BILL, WENDY DAVIS AND
HER COLLEAGUES CAN STAND AND
TALK AND MANEUVER AND DO
EVERYTHING THEY CAN, THE OUTCOME
OF THIS IS MORE OR LESS DECIDED.
THEY'RE GOING TO PASS THIS BILL.
THE VICTORY WAS ACHIEVED IN
FORCING THEM GO INTO A SECOND
SPECIAL SESSION.
AND THE REALITY IS, WHATEVER THE
OUTCOME, WENDY DAVIS IS THE FOLK
HERO THAT EVERYONE VIEWS HER AS
AND HER CELEBRITY IS ON THE
RISE, HER POLITICAL PROSPECTS
HAVE RISEN AND FOR THE FIRST
TIME REALLY, I GO BACK TO ANNE
RICHARDS, GWEN, FOR THE FIRST
TIME SINCE ANNE RICHARDS THE
DEMOCRATS HAVE SOMEBODY THEY CAN
RALLY AROUND AS A CANDIDATE WHO
MAY BEGIN TO TURN THE CLOCK
BACK.
>> Ifill: KEEP YOUR TEXAS
HISTORY HAT ON FOR A MOMENT.
HOW ATYPICAL IS THIS KIND OF
CHALLENGE?
WHEN YOU SAY, YOU KNOW, THAT
THEY'RE GOING TO LOSE THE WAR,
JUST THE FACT OF THIS KIND OF
CHALLENGE, HOW UNUSUAL WAS IT?
>> THERE HAVEN'T BEEN MANY
SUCCESSFUL FILIBUSTERS AND
CERTAINLY NOT OF THIS LENGTH IN
THE HISTORY OF THIS STATE.
IT WASN'T JUST SUCCESSFUL FOR
WHAT SHE DID, IT WAS SUCCESSFUL
FOR THE WAY SHE DID IT AND FOR
THE TIMES IN WHICH SHE DID IT.
I GOO BACK TO THIS POINT:
DEMOCRATS HAVEN'T HAD VERY MUCH
TO BE HOPEFUL ABOUT IN THIS
STATE FOR A VERY LONG TIME.
THERE HAVEN'T BEEN CANDIDATES
WHO HAVE RUN SUCCESSFULLY WHO
HAVE COME CLOSE TO WINNING.
IN THE LEGISLATURE THE DEMOCRATS
DON'T HAVE ENOUGH NUMBERS TO DO
ANYTHING OR PREVENT ANYTHING.
IT'S BEEN ACATION WHERE THE
DEMOCRATS ARE EFFECTIVELY THE
THIRD PARTY IN A TWO-PARTY
STATE.
THE TWO PARTIES ARE THE OLD
MODERATE REPUBLICANS AND THE TEA
PARTY AND MOST OF THE BIG
POLITICAL FIGHTS ARE REPUBLICAN
ON REPUBLICAN RATHER THAN
REPUBLICAN AND DEMOCRAT.
REDISTRICTING HAS TAKEN
COMPETITION OUT OF THE VAST
MAJORITY OF OUR ELECTIONS SO
THAT'S WHY IT'S SO UNUSUAL.
DEMOCRATS HAVE HAD SO LITTLE TO
GET ENERGIZED ABOUT.
LAST NIGHT WAS ONE THAT WE
HAVEN'T SEEN IN A LONG TIME.
>> Ifill: IT WAS INTERESTING
TO WATCH, EVAN SMITH.
THANKS A LOT FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS, GWEN.
ONLINE, SEE HOW SOCIAL MEDIA
ALLOWED SPECTARS ATOCROSS THE
COUNTRY TO TAKE PART IN THE
AUSTIN DEBATE.
>> Brown: FINALLY TONIGHT TO
EGYPT, WHERE THERE IS UNREST AS
ANGRY CROWDS REACT TO A MAJOR
ADDRESS BY THE COUNTRY'S
PRESIDENT.
MARGARET WARNER HAS MORE.
>> Warner: TRYING TO DEFUSE
GROWING DEFIANCE TO HIS RULE,
EGYPTIAN PRESIDENT MOHAMMED
MORSI CALLED ON HIS OPPONENTS TO
HELP END THE COUNTRY'S
POLITICAL POLIZARIZATION.
IN A LIVE SPEECH TELEVISED
NATIONWIDE, MORSI WARNED THAT IF
THE BREACH ISN'T HEALED, EGYPT
COULD SLIP INTO CHAOS.
HE ACKNOWLEDGED HE'D MADE
MISTAKES, BUT ALSO ACCUSED
REMNANTS OF THE OLD REGIME OF
FOMENTING ANTI-GOVERNMENT
VIOLENCE.
HE SPOKE JUST DAYS BEFORE MASS
PROTESTS SET FOR SUNDAY ON THE
ONE-YEAR ANNIVERSARY OF MORSI
AND THE MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD
ASSUMING POWER.
EARLIER TODAY, TWO PEOPLE WERE
KILLED AND MORE THAN 100 WERE
INJURED AS CLASHES BROKE OUT
BETWEEN MORSI OPPONENTS AND
SUPPORTERS.
FOR MORE, WE TURN TO NANCY
YOUSSEF OF McCLATCHY NEWSPAPERS
IN CAIRO.
NANCY, THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE PRESIDENT'S SPEECH ENDED
REALLY JUST ABOUT AN HOUR AGO.
WE SAW THERE WERE THRONGS,
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE IN TAHRIR
SQUARE WATCHING.
WHAT WAS THE REACTION?
>> WELL, JUST AS MORSI HAS BEEN
A DIVISIVE FIGURE THROUGHOUT HIS
PRESIDENCY, THIS SPEECH HAD JUST
A DIVISIVE REACTION.
IF YOU WERE IN TAHRIR SQUARE,
THE ICONIC TAHRIR SQUARE WHERE
THE UPRISING OF 2011 LED TO THE
FALL OF HOSNI MUBARAK THERE WERE
CHANTS OF "LEAVE" AND CURSING.
IN FACT, YOU COULD BEARLIER THAT
SPEECH THERE BECAUSE OF ALL THE
CHANTS.
IF YOU WERE NASR CITY WHICH IS
NEAR THE PRESIDENTIAL PALACE
THERE WERE CHEERS OF SUPPORT FOR
MORSI.
THOSE WHO SUPPORT HIM SAW THIS
SPEECH AS CONFIRMATION THAT HE
NEEDS MORE TIME, THAT HE HAS
BEEN BULLIED BY REMNANTS OF THE
FORMER REGIME AND OPPONENTS SAW
THIS AS ANOTHER EXAMPLE OF A
PRESIDENT WHO WOULDN'T REACH OUT
TO HIM.
IN A SENSE, THIS SPEECH
CONFIRMED WHAT PEOPLE FELT GOING
INTO IT SO THE ULTIMATE GOAL OF
PACIFYING CONCERNS AT THIS
WEEKEND'S PROTEST THAT COULD
TURN VIOLENT, IN THAT EFFORT HE
FAILED.
RATHER IT SOLIDIFIED THE LINES
THAT HAVE BEEN HERE SINCE THE
EARLY DAYS OF HIS PRESIDENCY.
>> Ifill: IN FACT, THE LINES
HAVE BEEN THERE SINCE THE EARLY
DAYS OF HIS PRESIDENCY.
HAS IT BEEN GROWING?
IS THE POLARIZATION GROWING?
HOW SEVERE IS IT.
SAY COMPARED TO A YEAR AGO?
>> WELL, WHEN HE TOOK OFFICE
INITIALLY, HE WON WITH 52% OF
THE VOTE AND HIS POPULARITY
RATING WAS AS HIGH AS 74% EARLY
ON.
YOU TALK TO EGYPTIANS NOW MORE
AND MORE OF THEM ARE FRUSTRATED
BY EVERYDAY PROBLEMS.
TODAY IN EGYPT ALONE I SPOKE TO
EGYPTIANS WHO STOOD IN LINE FOR
LITERALLY 24 HOURS IN NEARLY
100-DEGREE HEAT TO FILL UP THEIR
CAR WITH GASOLINE.
MORE PEOPLE ARE HUNGRY, MORE
PEOPLE ARE UNEMPLOYED.
THE HOPES AND DREAMS OF THE 2000
UPRISING ARE GONE.
PEOPLE ARE LOOKING FOR BASIC
SERVICES TO COME BACK.
A GOOD DAY IN EGYPT IS WHERE ONE
HAS WATER AND ELECTRICITY FOR
THE ENTIRE DAY SO I THINK HIS
POPULARITY HAS FALLEN AND IN
FACT THE POLL NUMBERS SHOW
THEY'RE BACK TO MUBARAK LEVELS.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME THERE ARE
PEOPLE WHO SAY THAT THE SOLUTION
IS NOT TO JUST KEEP GOING TO THE
STREETS AND CALLING FOR
PROTESTS.
THAT IS AT THE MOMENT OF
ACCOUNTABILITY IS AT THE BALLOT
BOX NOT ON THE STREETS AND
THAT'S WHAT'S AT STAKE THIS
WEEKEND.
WHO'S -- WHO DECIDES WHAT THE
POLITICAL WILL OF THIS NATION
IS?
THE BALLOT BOX OR A POPULAR
REFERENDUM AS TO OPPONENTS ARE
CALLING THE PROTESTS THEY'VE
PLANNED FOR THIS WEEKEND.
>> Warner: SO THE PROTEST
PLANNED FOR SUNDAY, WHICH IS THE
ONE YEAR ANNIVERSARY OF HIS
TAKING POWER, DOES IT HAVE AN
OBJECTIVE?
OR IS IT JUST TO VENT?
>> WELL, THAT'S A GREAT POINT.
THE -- ONE OF THE REASONS THAT
-- THAT OPPONENTS HAVE HAD A
HARD TIME WINNING OVER SUPPORT
OR WINNING THEIR FIGHT TO CALL
FOR MORSI'S RESIGNATION IS THAT
THEY ARE DISENFRANCHISED AND
JUST ORGANIZED AMONGST
THEMSELVES AND CAN'T AGREE ON
WHAT THEY WANT TO COME UP WITH
AT THESE PROTESTS.
SOME WILL SAY MORSI NEED TO STEP
DOWN AND BE REPLACED BY THE
CONSTITUTIONAL COURT LEADER.
SOME WILL SAY THAT THE ARMY
SHOULD TAKE OVER AGAIN.
SOME WILL SAY THAT THERE SHOULD
BE NO ELECTIONS RIGHT AWAY.
SOME WILL SAY THAT ELECTIONS
SHOULD HAPPEN IN SIX MONTHS FROM
NOW.
SO THERE'S REALLY NO AGREEMENT
AMONGST THEM.
IT'S THIS CHORUS OF CALLS FOR
CHANGE WITHOUT REALLY DEFINING
WHAT THAT CHANGE SHOULD LOOK
LIKE.
AND THAT'S ONE OF THE REASONS
THAT MORSI HAS BEEN ABLE TO HOLD
ON TO POWER IN A WAY THAT I
THINK MOST PEOPLE HERE WOULDN'T
HAVE EXPECTED HAD THERE BEEN A
VIABLE OPPOSITION MOVEMENT HERE.
>> Warner: AND YOU MENTIONED
THE ARMY.
WHAT HAS BEEN THE ARMY'S ROLE IN
ALL THIS?
I GATHER THAT THE ARMY CHIEF
MADE A -- ISSUED KIND OF A
WARNING ON SUNDAY TO BOTH SIDES
IN THIS CONFLICT.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THE MAN APPOINTED BY MORSI IN
AUGUST SAID THAT BOTH SIDES
NEEDED TO COME TO SOME SORT OF
RECONCILIATION.
HE GAVE THEM A WEEK DEADLINE
AND, IN FACT, MORSI IN HIS
SPEECH TONIGHT CALLED FOR A
COMMITTEE, A RECONCILIATION
COMMITTEE.
HE ALSO SAID, THOUGH, THAT THE
MILITARY WOULD ONLY INTERVENE IF
IT TURNED INTO A QUOTE/UNQUOTE
UNCONTROLLABLE CONFLICT NO
MATTER WHO STARTED IT.
THAT IS, IF THE BROTHERHOOD AND
THE MORSI SUPPORTERS INSTIGATE
VIOLENCE THEY WILL DEFEND MORSI
OPPONENTS AND IF MOR
THE MILITARY IS A REVERED
INSTITUTION HERE AND SEEN AS THE
LAST NATIONALIST FORCE THAT
COULD SERVE AS AN ARBITER IN
WHAT'S BECOME A PROTRACTED
CONFLICT THAT HAS DEFINED
MORSI'S FIRST YEAR IN OFFICE.
>> Warner: WHAT'S THE
ATMOSPHERE LIKE AT LEAST IN
CAIRO AND ELSEWHERE AS THIS
WEEKEND APPROACHES?
>> IT'S VERY TENSE IN 2011 WHEN
THE UPRISING STARTED IT BEGAN AS
A WAY TO RID THE POLICE OF
CORRUPTION AND EVOLVED INTO A
CALL FOR MUBARAK'S FALL.
WHEREAS HERE IT'S STARTING AS
ALREADY AS A CALL BY MANY FOR
MORSI TO STEP DOWN.
SO THERE'S A REAL FEELING OF TEX
+*RNS STORES ARE EMPTY, PEOPLE
ARE STOCKING UP ON FOOD, ON
WATER, ON AMMUNITION IN SOME
CASES.
PEOPLE ARE LOOKING DOWN IN THEIR
HOMES.
PEOPLE ARE TRYING TO FIND
GASOLINE WHEREVER THEY CAN AND
THERE'S A REAL EXPECTATION OF
VIOLENCE.
AND WHEN YOU ASK EGYPTIANS WHY
IS IT OKAY FOR PEOPLE TO DIE?
THEY'LL SAY QUESTION WE MIGHT
HAVE TO DIE TO GET RID OF MORSI,
THAT HE WILL NOT LEAVE EASILY
AND THAT THIS IS THE PRICE TO
REALLY BRING ABOUT A REVOLUTION
IN EGYPT SO IT IS THE MOST TENSE
I HAVE THAT EVER SEEN THIS
COUNTRY AND I THINK THAT'S WHY
THIS SPEECH WAS THE MOST
IMPORTANT SPEECH DELIVERED SINCE
MUBARAK'S RESIGNATION IN
FEBRUARY, 2011.
>> Warner: WELL, NANCY
YOUSSEFF OF McCLATCHY, THAT'S
SAYING SOMETHING.
>> Brown: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
THE U.S. SUPREME COURT RULED
SAME-SEX COUPLES ARE ENTITLED TO
FEDERAL MARRIAGE BENEFITS.
IT ALSO CLEARED THE WAY FOR GAY
MARRIAGES TO RESUME IN
CALIFORNIA.
AND PRESIDENT OBAMA ARRIVED IN
SENEGAL, BEGINNING A THREE-
NATION AFRICAN TOUR.
ONE STOP WILL BE IN SOUTH
AFRICA, WHERE FORMER PRESIDENT
NELSON MANDELA REMAINS IN
CRITICAL CONDITION.
>> Ifill: AND SOMETHING
COMPLETELY DIFFERENT ONLINE: WHY
DO HUMANS HAVE THE UNIQUE
ABILITY TO THROW FASTBALLS?
KWAME HOLMAN TELLS US MORE.
>> Holman: DID EARLY SPEAR
HUNTING HELP HUMANS EVOLVE INTO
GREAT BASEBALL PITCHERS?
ON SCIENCE WEDNESDAY, WE LOOK AT
THE MECHANICS OF THROWING AND A
NEW THEORY ABOUT THE EVOLUTION
OF THAT SPECIALIZED SKILL.
AND FOR THOSE LOOKING FOR A GOOD
RETURN ON INVEST, AN ENERGY
EXPERT ON MAKING SENSE SAYS
INCREASING ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN
THE HOME MIGHT BE THE SAFEST
BET.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
>> Brown: AND AGAIN, TO OUR
HONOR ROLL OF AMERICAN SERVICE
PERSONNEL KILLED IN THE
AFGHANISTAN CONFLICT.
WE ADD THEM AS THEIR DEATHS ARE
MADE OFFICIAL AND PHOTOGRAPHS
BECOME AVAILABLE.
HERE, IN SILENCE, ARE NINE MORE.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL COVER
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S TRIP TO THREE
AFRICAN NATIONS: SENEGAL,
TANZANIA AND SOUTH AFRICA.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
HANKTS FOR JOINING US.
GOOD NIGHT.